---
layout: post
title: Do you make good decisions?
thumbnail: images/beyond-team-size/beyond-team-size.jpg
---

**How good are your decisions?** - Every day we decide a lot of things small and big. In our professional setting we often have clear deciders, wheter this is a senior subject matter expert, the traditional "boss" or some collaborative process in an emporwered team does not really matter. Fact ist as contrary to our private live in business we often have to make decisions more explicit and often have to document them, for instance in the form of meeting minutes. Some people are good at deciding, others find it very hard. 

There are certain qualities which make good decisions. By *good *I don't necessarily mean that the outcome of the decision like being right or wrong, but how valuable taking the decision was in the first place. In genereal any decision which does not trigger a more or less immediate action is a worthless decision. Good decisions are explicit and well understood by the peolple involved and even if not everybody agrees there is at least consent to act on thast the decision for the time being. Bad decisions are fuzzy, heavily disputed and not followed by the people. Sometimes it is even worse that these decisions are even invisible. By invisible I mean that people are not even sure wheter a decision was taken or not, so people fail to act on it or act too early and possibly in a wrong direction.

Generally I experience two types of deciders. The ones who are most happy once a decision is done so they decide fast and early and others who try to first find and analyze as many options as possible before deciding. People in the first category often feel uncomfortable until a decision is taken while people in the second category often experience doubt after taking a decision wheter this was the right thing to do or not. Both ways have their merits and drawbacks. The quick deciders often have to readjust or even revert decisions because they lacked part of the context surrounding the matter to be decided on. The careful analysts sometimes miss the opportunity for a decision and are often seen as not deciding at all. Both ways may work well on their own, problems arrive often when people from the different spectrum have to work together. 

To be good at making decisions you have to be aware what kind of decision-making is happening and what kind of decider you are. Reflect for a moment on the last big decision you took, think about how dicussions that lead to decisions look like in your team. Making this process of thinking transparent to others is an essential part on how well decisions are accepted. In my opinion it is good to state this tendency as explicit as possible and accept that whoever takes the decision is functioning either way. 